docs: add usage guidelines for systemd targets, services and directives (#240)
AMDEPYC/sev-certify: docs/systemd-guidelines.md

1. Stage chaining stays stable — targets give each stage a named boundary that subsequent stages reference. As workers are added or removed from a stage, only the barrier changes (Requires=); the target and the chain above it are untouched.
2. Intra-stage ordering without coupling — when workers within a stage must run in sequence, a started barrier gives them a common synchronization point without workers needing to reference each other directly. Without the barrier, you'd have to wire workers to each other, coupling units that conceptually belong to the same stage independently.

# The target - barrier service pattern

Each target Requires= and After= the previous target. After= the previous target helps provide inter-stage ordering. Each target also Wants= and After= its barrier service. For example, in report.target:<br> 

Requires=test.target<br>
After=test.target<br>
Wants=report-done.service<br>
After=report-done.service<br>

A target has no ExecStart, so without this second After= and even though targets have After=`<`previous target`>`, all the targets would activate at essentially the same time and, as a result, be out of sync with the stage workers. 

> Each barrier service Requires= and After= all of its worker services. A barrier does have an ExecStart, but the simplest, most natural way for a barrier to stay in sync with its workers is to After= all of the workers. For example, in guest report-done.service:<br>

Author: Description of intra-stage below is relevant. Will update the PR differently, but still with improvements.

Requires=display-guest-logs.service sev-certificate-generator.service<br>
After=display-guest-logs.service sev-certificate-generator.service<br>

# Intra-stage ordering

In cases where intra-stage ordering is required, worker services use After= to achieve it. This works for oneshot services. For non-oneshot, either<br>

1) have a oneshot service use a non-systemd mechanism to tell when the non-oneshot is done and use After= with this oneshot service or 

> 2) use OnSuccess (and OnFailure?). 

Reviewer: I like this suggestion

An example of 1) is the verify-guest service (Type=oneshot) checking logs to determine when the launch-guest service (Type=simple) is done.<br>

# Bootstrapping

> Stop targets (guest and host) have WantedBy=multi-user.target. multi-user.target is the "system is ready" terminal target — always present, always reached on normal boot. This is the only use of WantedBy that's required in sev-certify. This "enrollment" is not enough to "activate" the stop targets. Activation of the stop targets requires enabling (or starting) them. Do this via an "enable stop.target" directive in a .preset file.<br>

Author: @copilot everything else can and does use Wants or Requires. The sev-certify stop targets boot strap this process.

# General systemd units

These are units for which we don't maintain either unit files (.service, .target, etc.) or "unit code". For simplicity and clarity, it's best to reference them in targets, via Requires/Wants/After. This should be done as early as possible, for example, Requires= and After= in boot.target.<br>

# Other directives

## Type

In sev-certify, use `Type=oneshot` with `RemainAfterExit=yes` when a suitable `TimeoutStartSec` value can be determined. Otherwise, use `Type=simple`.<br>

> 

Author: @copilot to me, RemainAfterExit=yes seems to fit sev-certify better and there doesn't seem to be a downside other than maybe salvaging more of a "bad boot".

You can't easily use Before/After with simple services since they satisfy Before/After as soon as they start. See intra-stage ordering above. With oneshot services, Before/After isn't satisfied until the main process exits.<br>

With oneshot services, `TimeoutStartSec` is how long the main process has to exit/finish before systemd kills it. This can affect subprocesses and whether it does depends on `RemainAfterExit` and `KillMode` directives.<br>

default: simple<br>

## RemainAfterExit

> In sev-certify, use `RemainAfterExit=yes` with oneshot services and `RemainAfterExit=no`, the default, with simple services.<br>

Author: @copilot It's possible that the code isn't compliant with the guidelines. The code that I believe you're thinking of here was committed and merged before this PR was opened.

`RemainAfterExit` has the same semantics for oneshot and simple services. `RemainAfterExit=no` (default) means the service will stop when the main process exits. `RemainAfterExit=yes` means the service will stay active after the main process exits.<br>

Simple services are expected to keep running so `RemainAfterExit=yes` is much less common with them than with oneshot services. (For simple services, `RemainAfterExit=yes` normally has no effect and can mask exit-causing errors.)<br>

default: no<br>

## DefaultDependencies

In sev-certify, use `DefaultDependencies=no`.<br>

`DefaultDependencies=no` allows precise, self-contained placement of a unit in the dependency graph. systemd units in sev-certify aren't standard and default dependencies don't make sense for them.<br>

> 

Author: same comment as above. While it's true that guidelines are in flux, the sev-certify code being thought about here may not end up being compliant and isn't compliant with this version/commit of the guidelines.

# Terminology

"Targets" (.target files) define/establish "stages", for example, boot, test and report stages.<br>
"Barrier services" are closely related to targets, but allow targets to be decoupled from stage details. "Barriers" and "barrier services" are used interchangeably.<br>
"Worker services" are services that we create, the .service file and the service code. "Workers" and "worker services" are used interchangeably.<br>

# Overview

## Activation versus ordering versus enrollment 

Activation of a systemd unit happens via

- systemctl start (or restart)<br>
- Wants/Requires<br>
- WantedBy/RequiredBy plus enabling via enable directive .preset file or systemctl enable<br>

> For sev-certify, somehow automating systemctl start versus one of the other activation methods doesn't make sense. Also, the "directions" of Wants/Requires and WantedBy/RequiredBy are opposite and it may only be appropriate/correct to change "one side". For example, it's inappropriate to change multi-user.target to have Wants/Requires=`<`one or more sev-certify units`>`. WantedBy/RequiredBy "enrolls" a unit and this plus enabling is one way to activate.<br>

Reviewer: ` Also, the "directions" of Wants/Requires and WantedBy/RequiredBy are opposite and it may only be appropriate/correct to change "one side". `

By this do you mean that we should only be having the relationship defined one way, correct? What I mean is that if unit A requires unit B. We would define in systemd either 

- (In A) Requires=B.service
- (in B) RequiredBy=A.service

But we shouldn't have both? I don't disagree with this statement.

Maybe we should clarify which one is preferred. from my  understanding you're saying here we probably prefer RequiredBy.

Author: I think what I was trying to say is Wants/Requires is more straightforward from standpoint of getting services started, but it's bad practice to edit a target file that you don't own, in this case, multi-user.target. So instead, use WantedBy/RequiredBy + enable (+ preset). I didn't but probably should mention preset. I believe the default works for sev-certify since sev-certify does everything on the first (and only) boot. 

Now, I'm realizing there may be a compromise: create stop.conf with

[Unit]
Wants=stop-done.service

and put stop.conf in /etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.d/ directory. If we did this, then I don't believe we would need any WantedBy/RequiredBy.

Ordering is only achieved via Before/After directives in unit files.

## Value of having both targets and "barrier services"

> (straight from Claude Code)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

It's ok, what isn't this days :)

1. Stage chaining stays stable — targets give each stage a named boundary that subsequent stages reference. As workers are added or removed from a stage, only the barrier changes (Requires=); the target and the chain above it are untouched.

> 2. Intra-stage ordering without coupling — when workers within a stage must run in sequence, a started barrier gives them a common synchronization point without workers needing to reference each other directly. Without the barrier, you'd have to wire workers to each other, coupling units that conceptually belong to the same stage independently.

Reviewer: Another reason for using barrier services is to make failure handling more explicit and resilient. If a target directly depends on all of its worker services, a single worker failure can prevent the target from being reached and stop the rest of the flow. With a barrier, the target can remain the stable stage boundary, while the barrier owns the responsibility of running the stage services, collecting their status, and deciding how failure is represented. This allows later stages, especially reporting, to still be reached so failures can be captured instead of skipping directly to shutdown or leaving the run incomplete.

Author: Cool. I can weave this in.

Requires=test.target<br>
After=test.target<br>
Wants=report-done.service<br>
After=report-done.service<br>

A target has no ExecStart, so without this second After= and even though targets have After=`<`previous target`>`, all the targets would activate at essentially the same time and, as a result, be out of sync with the stage workers. 

Each barrier service Requires= and After= all of its worker services. A barrier does have an ExecStart, but the simplest, most natural way for a barrier to stay in sync with its workers is to After= all of the workers. For example, in guest report-done.service:<br>

Requires=display-guest-logs.service sev-certificate-generator.service<br>
After=display-guest-logs.service sev-certificate-generator.service<br>

This "synchronization process" alone doesn't work for non-oneshot systemd services. See Intra-stage ordering below for how to handle this, basically, have two or more workers together "go outside" systemd for synchronization in order to ensure that everything can stay in sync.

# Intra-stage ordering

> In cases where intra-stage ordering is required, worker services use After= to achieve it. This works for oneshot services. For non-oneshot, either<br>

Reviewer: I don't know if we need the explanation, but the reason After= does not behave as expected with non-oneshot services is that After= only waits for initialization, not completion. Since long-running services do not have a completion state, once the service initializes successfully, systemd considers it safe to start dependent services.

Author: Right. I thought I had a short statement of this. If not, I'll add.

# General systemd units

These are units for which we don't maintain either unit files (.service, .target, etc.) or "unit code". For simplicity and clarity, it's best to reference them in targets, via Requires/Wants/After. This should be done as early as possible, for example, Requires= and After= in boot.target.<br>

# Other directives

## Type

In sev-certify, use `Type=oneshot` with `RemainAfterExit=yes` when a suitable `TimeoutStartSec` value can be determined. Otherwise, use `Type=simple`.<br>

You can't easily use Before/After with simple services since they satisfy Before/After as soon as they start. See intra-stage ordering above. With oneshot services, Before/After isn't satisfied until the main process exits.<br>

With oneshot services, `TimeoutStartSec` is how long the main process has to exit/finish before systemd kills it. This can affect subprocesses and whether it does depends on `RemainAfterExit` and `KillMode` directives.<br>

> default: simple<br>

Reviewer: I have a few comments on this section.

First, I don't think TimeoutStartSec is necessarily the right criteria to decide between Type=oneshot and Type=simple. None of our current services rely on TimeoutStartSec, and I don't think service type selection should be driven by whether we can determine a timeout value.

Instead, I think the recommendation should be based on service behavior. For most of our services, Type=oneshot is the better fit because they are intended to perform finite work and run to completion once. I expect that to apply to the majority of services in this project.

Also, the main benefit of Type=oneshot in our architecture is ordering semantics. After= and Before= only wait for service activation, not completion. For long-running services (Type=simple), dependencies are satisfied as soon as the service initializes successfully. With Type=oneshot, ordering is only satisfied once the main process exits, which aligns better with our stage-based execution model.

RemainAfterExit=yes serves a different purpose. It keeps the service in the active state after execution has completed, allowing the unit to represent that a stage has finished. That is why barrier services use it by definition—they act as completion markers for all work associated with that target.

Without RemainAfterExit=yes, barrier services immediately transition to inactive after completion, which can lead to them being retriggered when revisiting target dependencies later in the flow.

Author: I was trying to incorporate what you said about why the launch guest service is Type=simple: QEMU getting killed under certain conditions. I was thinking this would fall into the when a suitable TimeoutStartSec value can't be determined category, but I believe this is wrong as my understanding now is that absence of TimeoutStartSec is effectively the same as TimeoutStartSec=infinity. I'll address.

## RemainAfterExit

In sev-certify, use `RemainAfterExit=yes` with oneshot services and `RemainAfterExit=no`, the default, with simple services.<br>

> `RemainAfterExit` has the same semantics for oneshot and simple services. `RemainAfterExit=no` (default) means the service will stop when the main process exits. `RemainAfterExit=yes` means the service will stay active after the main process exits.<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`RemainAfterExit` has the same semantics for oneshot and simple services. `RemainAfterExit=no` (default) means the service will become inactive when the main process exits. `RemainAfterExit=yes` means the service will stay active after the main process exits.<br>
```

Simple services are expected to keep running so `RemainAfterExit=yes` is much less common with them than with oneshot services. (For simple services, `RemainAfterExit=yes` normally has no effect and can mask exit-causing errors.)<br>

default: no<br>

## DefaultDependencies

In sev-certify, use `DefaultDependencies=no`.<br>

`DefaultDependencies=no` allows precise, self-contained placement of a unit in the dependency graph. systemd units in sev-certify aren't standard and default dependencies don't make sense for them.<br>

default: yes<br>

## KillMode

> `KillMode` controls which processes systemd will kill when a unit is stopped.<br>

Reviewer: Do you have an example of where we use KillMode?

Author: I only included KillMode like this since I mentioned it earlier, but the mention was in a part of the doc that I'll be updating so the reference may go.

For sev-certify, it's better to use `RemainAfterExit=yes` to avoid undesired process killing than to change `KillMode` from control-group, its default.<br>

default: control-group<br>

## TimeoutStartSec

> See above. Also, `TimeoutStartSec=infinity` is how to express no timeout.<br>

Reviewer: Same thing, I don't know if we use this at all

Author: I thought the default was 90s and oneshot services that took longer would be treated as though they failed. So I thought it was a matter of how long a oneshot service needed to complete. Now I see that TimeoutStartSec is disabled for oneshot services by default and setting it enables it.

I'll definitely change to reflect correct understanding. Thanks.
